DOUBLE TROUBLE - A RARE CASE OF 
RIGAFEDE DISEASE WITH LUDWIGS 
ANGINA  
Dr Naveen Raj VM  (Junior Resident)   
Dr Raveenthiran  V(PROFESSOR), DEPT OF 
PEDIATRIC SURGERY, GOVERNMENT MEDICAL 
COLLEGE, CUDDALORE (EST RAJAH MUTHIAH 
MEDICAL COLLEGE)  
 
INTRODUCTION:  
 Riga -Fede disease (RFD) is a benign 
lingual ulceration caused by repetitive 
trauma.   It is also known as traumati c 
eosinophilic  granuloma . It was described 
initially by Riga in 1881 and by Fede in 1890. It 
is usually caused by the sharp edges of newly 
erupted teeth  by repeated forward and 
backward movements of the tongue over the 
lower incisors. Its most common site is on the 
tongue . B ut lip, palate, gingiva, vestibular 
mucosa and floor of the mouth may also get 
involved . It usually presents in early infancy in 
association with natal or neonatal teeth or 
eruption of lower incisors.  The painful 
symptoms may be absent o r acute, up to the 
point of preventing the baby from feeding  
 Eruption of first primary tooth starts 
on an average at around six to seven months 
of age.1 Presence of teeth at birth or within a 
month after birth is considered rare. These 
teeth are called na tal teeth when they are 
present at birth and neonatal teeth when they 
erupted during the neonatal period (first 30 
days of life).  
 
CASE REPORT:  
 A 12 day old baby girl came  with 
complaints of  swelling over the left side of 
face and bleeding from the floor o f the mouth 
for past one week which was associated with 
difficulty in feeding and fever.  The child also 
had the history of natal teeth present since 
birth , which was accidentally removed 
partially by the baby’s relatives . On 
examination  an ulcer was present over the  
ventral -surface of the tongue extending from 
middle third to the lower alveolar surface 
with remnant natal t ooth and also hard 
indurated non -fluctuant swelling present over 
the left side of lower face with warmth, tenderness and erythema involving 
submandibular region extending from angle of 
mandible to chin. Fortunately , the baby ha d 
no breathing difficulties. The diagnosis of 
RIGAFEDE DISEASE and LUDWIGS ANGINA was 
made based on the above clinical findings, 
following which  immediate  floor  of the mouth  
debridement with removal of remnant natal 
teeth followed by incision  and drainage of the 
abscess  was done. During debridement, there 
was also a 0.5 × 0.5 cm . Sinus tract like ulcer 
noted in the lower lip at LABIO GINGIVAL 
SULCUS.  Debrided  tissue sent for  
HISTOPATHOLOGY examination and fungal 
smear  and culture .
   
 
Ulcer at floor of mouth with remnant  
Tooth  (Fig A and Fig B)  
 
 
LUDWIGS ANGINA  
Fig A  
Fig B  
Fig C   
Floor of the mouth debridement  
With removal of remnant tooth  
 
     
Incision and Drainage  
 
 
DISCUSSION : 
 
RIGAFEDE’S DISEASE  is a  rare  benign mu cosal 
diseas e, defined as persist ent ulceration of  
Oral muc osa  as a resul t of repetitive  trauma  
of ant ero ventral surface of the  tongue  by the 
sharp prim ary tooth  due to frictional f orward 
and backward movement  of the to ngue . This 
condition has been documented under 
various art icles as a rare benign condition and 
not life threa ten ing . But in our case , it leads to 
a p otentially life -threatening  condition  
LUDWIG ’S ANGINA . LUDWIG'S ANGI NA is life -
threatening cellulitis of the soft tissue 
involving the floor of the mouth and neck. It 
involves three compartments of the floor of 
the mouth, the sublingual , submental, and 
submandibular. The infection is rapidly 
progressive, leading to potential airway 
obstruction. The most common etiology is a 
dental infection in the lower molars, mainly 
second and third, accounting for over 90% of 
cases. Any recent infecti on or injury to the 
area may predispose the patient to develop 
Ludwig's angina. Predisposing factors include 
diabetes, oral malignancy, dental caries, 
alcoholism, malnutrition, and 
immunocompromised status.   This coexisting condition is a rare 
event in newborn  and any newborn with natal 
tooth to be followed up for RIGAFEDE DISEASE  
and its s ubsequent cons equences. In our case 
infection of the  sublingual and  
submandi bular space  is believed to be 
contra cted from the site of R IGA FEDE ’S 
DIS EASE through lower  lip labio ging ival 
sulcus. This was identified intra operat ively on 
explora tion.  
 
 
 
RECOMMENDED READ ING S: 
  
Iandolo A, Amato A, Sangiovanni G, 
Argentino S, Pisano M. Riga -Fede dise ase: 
A systematic review and report of two 
cases. European Journal of Paediatric 
Dentistry. 2021 Dec 1;22(4):323 -31. 
Bhatt R, Dave B, Sheth M. Riga -Fede 
Disease: Report of a Case with Literature 
Review. Advances in Human  Biology. 
2015 Apr 30;5(1):52 -5. 
 
Al-Men dalawi M. Ludwig's angina: 
Pediatric case report and literature review. 
Journal of Mahatma Gandhi Institute of 
Medical Sciences. 2019 Jul 1;24(2):107 -. 
 
Chou YK, Lee CY, Chao HH. An upper 
airway obstruction emergency: Ludwig 
angina. Pediatric emergency care. 2007 
Dec 1;23(12):892 -6. 
Fig D  
Fig E  LABIO  
GINGIVAL  
SULCUS   